Have you thanked a green plant today? Plants are of enormous
benefit to humans. As a matter of fact people and all other animals
are totally dependent on plants for their existence.
Plants are the only living organisms that are able to convert light
energy into chemical energy. In the process of photosynthesis,
carbon dioxide and water—in the presence of light—are made
into simple sugars, which are the essential building blocks for
all life as we know it and for nearly all sources of fuel energy,
such as wood and the fossil fuels: coal, oil, and natural gas. In
addition, the energy stored in sugars is the only source of energy
to sustain living organisms. Without green plants, all animal life
would cease to exist. Yet, food from crops is only one of the
many plant products useful to people. What plants provide can
be summed up with these categories.
- Food
- Fiber/Fabrication
- Fuel
- Pharmaceuticals
- Fermentation
- Flowers/Forests/Fancification
- Fragrance
Food — We obviously eat plants but the animals we may also
eat rely on plants for their food. Plants also make our food taste
better. What would our food taste like without spices such as pepper,
garlic, nutmeg, mustard, cinnamon, parsley, sage, rosemary, thyme,
vanilla, cocoa, and many others, all of which are plant products?
How many of us can do without sugar from sugar cane and sugar
beets, coffee or chocolate? For centuries people have appreciated
the development of beer, bread, wine and cheese with the help of
plants.
Fiber and fabrication — Before the development of synthetic
products such as nylon, orlon, and plastics, people were dependent
upon plants for fibers and building materials. Wood products
were, and still are, a major source of construction materials.
Nearly all of the written and printed matter produced through
history has depended on the use of paper products derived from plant
fibers or wood. Fibers from the cotton, flax, and hemp plants and
wool from animals grazing on plants were the major textiles used
for cloth. Even synthetics are in most cases plant products since
most are made from petroleum or coal, which are remnants of plants
from millions of years ago. Before synthetic rubber was developed
during World War II, the United States and the world rolled on tires
made of latex from the sap of the rubber tree. Latex is still widely
used for surgical tubing and many other products that require its
unique properties.
Fuel — Wood was once an important fuel, and still is in some parts
of the world. All fossil fuels (coal, gas and petroleum) are the product
of photosynthesis that took place several hundred million years ago.
The problem with using fossil fuels today is that this releases carbon
back into the atmosphere that has been stored as organic compounds
all this time. Plants are often mentioned in long-range plans to help
mitigate the energy crisis because they are a “renewable resource,”
unlike the fossil fuels. Biofuels and biodiesels from a variety of
plant sources such as soybeans, grains, vegetable oil, sugar cane,
and grasses may prove to be important alternatives to petroleum 
products.
Pharmaceuticals—Some plant products such as alcohol (produced
by fermentation of sugar), tobacco, and drugs like heroin from the
poppy, cocaine from coca and marijuana from the hemp plant have
often been put to less than desirable uses by people. Many other drugs
derived from plants are widely used in medicine. A good example is
digitalis from the foxglove plant, often prescribed for patients with
heart ailments. Plants with medicinal properties have been con­sumed
by people for centuries.
Plants provide beauty, shade from summer sun, wind protection,
animal habitat and lovely fragrance. Stop and look around you at
all the things that make up your everyday world. How many have
been derived from plants or plant products? How desirable would
the world be without trees, shrubs, flowers, and grass that color and
soften our world and ease the tensions of everyday life? Plants are
worth knowing and appreciating for they are indispensable to us in
every way. Although people have reached the moon, they have not
yet found a substitute for a living plant.